[4:24]
And, forbidden to you are, wedded women, those with spouses, that you should marry them before they
have left their spouses, be they Muslim free women or not; save what your right hands own, of captured
[slave] girls, whom you may have sexual intercourse with, even if they should have spouses among the
enemy camp, but only after they have been absolved of the possibility of pregnancy [after the completion of
one menstrual cycle]; this is what God has prescribed for you (kitāba is in the accusative because it is the
verbal noun). Lawful for you (read passive wa-uhilla, or active wa-ahalla), beyond all that, that is, except
what He has forbidden you of women, is that you seek, women, using your wealth, by way of a dowry or a
88

price, in wedlock and not, fornicating, in illicitly. Such wives as you enjoy thereby, and have had sexual
intercourse with, give them their wages, the dowries that you have assigned them, as an obligation; you are
not at fault in agreeing together, you and they, after the obligation, is waived, decreased or increased. God
is ever Knowing, of His creatures, Wise, in what He has ordained for them.
[4:25]
And whoever has not the means wherewith, [whoever] is not wealthy enough, to be able to marry believing
(al-mu’mināt, ‘believing’, is in accordance with the prevalent practice, and does not add to the import), free,
women in wedlock, let him take, in marriage, believing maids whom your right hands own. God knows very
well your faith, so suffice yourself with its outward manifestation and leave the innermost matters to Him,
for He is the One to know her [true] merit: many a slavegirl may be more excellent [in faith] than a free
woman, and this is meant to encourage marriage with slavegirls; the one of you is as the other, being equal
in religion, so do not disdain to marry with them. So marry them, with the permission of their folk, their
guardians, and give them their wages, their dowries, honourably, without procrastination or diminution, as
women in wedlock (muhsanāt, a circumstantial qualifier), in decency, not illicitly, openly fornicating, or
taking lovers, companions fornicating in secret. But when they are given in wedlock, [when] they are
married off (a variant reading [for the passive uhsinna, ‘they are given in wedlock’] has the active ahsanna,
‘they enter into wedlock’), if they commit lewdness, such as adultery, they shall be liable to half the
chastisement, the legal punishment, of married, free, virgin, women, who commit adultery, and are thus
given fifty lashes and banished for half a year; [male] slaves by analogy are liable to the same punishment.
Here, God has not made wedlock the precondition for the prescribed punishment to show that stoning does
not apply in their case [sc. slavegirls]. That, marrying of slavegirls on account of insufficient means, is for
those of you who fear the distress of sin, fornication (al-‘anat originally means distress, but is used to mean
zinā, ‘fornication’, because of the distress that it causes in the way of the punishment in this world and in
the Hereafter), as opposed to those of you who might not have such a fear [of distress] with regard to their
free women and for whom it is unlawful to marry her [the slavegirl]; likewise for one who has sufficient
means to marry a free woman [it is unlawful for him to marry a slavegirl instead]: this is the opinion of alShāfi‘ī. Moreover, God’s words ‘believing maids’ precludes unbelieving women, whom it is unlawful to marry,
even if one should find no believing women and fear [the distress of fornication]; yet it is better for you to
be patient, and abstain from marrying slavegirls, lest the child should become enslaved also. God is
Forgiving, Merciful, by allowing room for manoeuvre in these matters.
[4:26]
God desires to make clear to you, the laws of your religion and what is in your best interests, and to guide
you in the ways, the paths, of those, prophets, before you, in the way of what is lawful and what is
unlawful, so that you might follow them, and to turn [in forgiveness] towards you, bringing you back from
the disobedience which you practised, to obedience to Him; God is Knowing, of you, Wise, in what He has
ordained for you.
[4:27]
And God desires to turn [forgivingly] towards you (He repeats this in order to expand upon it), but those
who follow their passions, the Jews and Christians, or the Magians and adulterers, desire that you deviate
with a terrible deviation, transgressing what is right by committing what has been forbidden you, so that you
might be like them.
[4:28]
God desires to lighten things for you, and make the rulings of the Law easier for you; for man was created
weak, unable to abstain from women and passions.
[4:29]
O you who believe, consume not your goods between you wrongly, unlawfully according to the Law, through
89

usury or usurpation, except it be trading (tijāratan, also read tijāratun), so that the goods be from trade
effected, through mutual agreement, through mutual good-will: such [goods] you may consume. And kill not
yourselves, by committing what leads towards destruction on account of some affiliation, be it in this world
or the Hereafter. Surely God is ever Merciful to you, when He forbids you such things.
[4:30]
And whoever does that, which he has been forbidden, through aggression (‘udwānan, a circumstantial
qualifier), transgressing what is lawful, and injustice (zulman, [reiterated] for emphasis), him We shall
certainly expose, admit, to a fire, wherein he shall burn; and that for God is an easy matter.
[4:31]
If you avoid the grave sins that are forbidden you, those for which the threat of punishment has been
prescribed, like murder, fornication or theft — according to Ibn ‘Abbās, these number as much as seven
hundred — We will absolve you of your, minor, evil deeds, on account of your acts of obedience, and admit
you by an honourable gate (read mudkhalan or madkhalan), that is, [by an honourable] admittance or
location, namely, Paradise.
[4:32]
Do not covet that in which God has preferred some of you above others, in the way of worldly affairs or
religion, lest it lead to mutual envy and hatred. To men a share from, a reward for, what they have earned,
for their acts in the struggle and so on, and to women a share from what they have earned, by way of being
obedient to their spouses and guarding their private parts: this was revealed when Umm Salama said:
‘Would that we were men, so that we could join the struggle and receive the reward they receive!’ And ask
(read wa-s’alū or wa-salū) God of His bounty, what you need and He will give it to you; God is ever Knower
of all things, including where merit is deserved and that for which you ask.
[4:33]
To each, man and woman, We have appointed heirs, relations to be given, of that, property, which parents
and kinsmen leave, for them, and to those to whom your right hands (aymān, plural of yamīn, meaning
‘oath’ or ‘hand’) were pledged (read ‘āqadat or ‘aqadat), that is, those allies with whom before the coming of
Islam you made covenants of mutual assitance and inheritance. So give them, now, their share, their
portions of the inheritance, which is a sixth. God is ever Witness over everything, [ever] aware [of it],
including your circumstances: this verse was abrogated by His words, But those related by blood are nearer
to one another [Q. 8:75 and 33:6].